README.md, before:

# Qumulo-Lock-Manager

This script provides a Python based GUI to list and close SMB locks on a Qumulo cluster via the Qumulo REST API.  

## Why close file handles and what happens on the client when a file handle is closed?

The SMB protocol provides a system of locks which allow a client to set what kind of access it wants to a file stored in an SMB server.  Qumulo
supports most of those locks, such as Exclusive Read or Exclusive Write, but in a shared envionment this could lead to situations where users are
prevented from saving files or accessing files that others have locked.

In those situations the storage administrator could opt to force the closure of this file handle to allow other users access to the file.

Some very common example scenarios are when a user can't save an Excel spreasheet that another user has opened, or when the Mac Finder's Quick Look file previewer
triggered by one user prevents another user from saving a Photoshop or other graphics file.

Selecting and closing file handles via this app will close the handle on the Qumulo cluster side, but the client will still have the file open on its end and there will be no
perceptible change from the perspective of the client holding the lock.  

The client will be left with a "stale" local version of the file that might be out of sync with the version stored in the cluster.  This client will then need to close the file 
locally and reopen it from the Qumulo cluster to get back in sync with the stored version of the file.  

**_There is a possibility that the user which held the lock could lose work in progress if the file handle is closed before the file has been saved_**, so use caution when closing file handles!


## Requirements:

Tested with `Python 3.9` on Mac OS 13 and Windows 10

** A GUI is required for use with a Linux client! **

The script requires `port 443` access to the Qumulo cluster.

The Python package `Tk` is required, check if it is available by running this on a terminal:

`python -m tkinter`

Install Tk if needed:

Linux:

- `sudo apt-get install python3-tk`  (Ubuntu, Debian)
- `sudo yum install -y tkinter tk-devel`  (RHEL, CentOS, Oracle)
- `sudo dnf install python3-tkinter` (Fedora)
- `sudo pacman -S tk`  (Arch)

Mac:

- `brew install python-tk`

**Mac OS 14 Sonoma notice:** There is an issue with Tk and this Mac OS version that causes the GUI to be a blank white window with no buttons, you'll
need to upgrade Python to `3.13.0a2`, `3.12.1`, or `3.11.7`  (Tested working on `3.12-dev` November 29, 2023)

[More info at Python's Github](https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/110950)

Windows:

- The python insallation from the [Microsoft App Store](https://apps.microsoft.com/detail/9PJPW5LDXLZ5?hl=en-US&gl=US) contains the needed Tk dependencies


User Rights Needed:

This script requires a valid session token for a user with the following RBAC privileges:

`['PRIVILEGE_FS_LOCK_READ', 'PRIVILEGE_SMB_FILE_HANDLE_READ', 'PRIVILEGE_SMB_FILE_HANDLE_WRITE']`


## Installation:

Install the `requirements.txt` file (Linux, Mac and Windows):

  `pip install -r requirements.txt`

Copy `qumulo_lock_manager.py` to your machine, make it executable with `chmod +x qumulo_lock_manager.py`


Edit `qumulo_lock_manager.py` and enter your cluster address and valid Access Token on these variables:

- `cluster_address = "your.cluster.here.com"`  (FQDN or IP address)

- `token = "session-v1:etc..etc..etc"`

## Helpful Qumulo Care Articles:

[How to get an Access Token](https://care.qumulo.com/hc/en-us/articles/360004600994-Authenticating-with-Qumulo-s-REST-API#acquiring-a-bearer-token-by-using-the-web-ui-0-3) 

[Qumulo Role Based Access Control](https://care.qumulo.com/hc/en-us/articles/360036591633-Role-Based-Access-Control-RBAC-with-Qumulo-Core#managing-roles-by-using-the-web-ui-0-7)


## Operation:

Run the script with `/path/to/script/qumulo_lock_manager.py`

**_Please Note!_** File paths are resolved from the root of the Qumulo file system and might be different from what the end user sees!

**_Always_** double check paths before closing any open file handles!!

- Refresh the locks by clicking on the `List Locks` button
- Search for paths by typing in a part of the desired path or IP address of a Lock Holer (Client Machine) and clicking on the `Find Path or IP` button
  * The Locks view will automatically refresh   
- Clear the search box and click on `Search by Path` to see all locks
- To close a file handle, select the desired File ID / Path in the UI and click on the `Close File` button
- To quit, simply close the window  

![Screenshot of UI](https://github.com/Joe-Costa/Qumulo-Lock-Manager/assets/76791218/2fa5cf42-2351-4227-afe2-e08d06d04188)

Commit message:

Early drop down menu beta

README.md, after:

# Qumulo-Lock-Manager

This script provides a Python based GUI to list and close SMB locks on a Qumulo cluster via the Qumulo REST API.  

## Why close file handles and what happens on the client when a file handle is closed?

The SMB protocol provides a system of locks which allow a client to set what kind of access it wants to a file stored in an SMB server.  Qumulo
supports most of those locks, such as Exclusive Read or Exclusive Write, but in a shared envionment this could lead to situations where users are
prevented from saving files or accessing files that others have locked.

In those situations the storage administrator could opt to force the closure of this file handle to allow other users access to the file.

Some very common example scenarios are when a user can't save an Excel spreasheet that another user has opened, or when the Mac Finder's Quick Look file previewer
triggered by one user prevents another user from saving a Photoshop or other graphics file.

Selecting and closing file handles via this app will close the handle on the Qumulo cluster side, but the client will still have the file open on its end and there will be no
perceptible change from the perspective of the client holding the lock.  

The client will be left with a "stale" local version of the file that might be out of sync with the version stored in the cluster.  This client will then need to close the file 
locally and reopen it from the Qumulo cluster to get back in sync with the stored version of the file.  

**_There is a possibility that the user which held the lock could lose work in progress if the file handle is closed before the file has been saved_**, so use caution when closing file handles!


## Requirements:

Tested with `Python 3.9` on Mac OS 13 and Windows 10

** A GUI is required for use with a Linux client! **

The script requires `port 443` access to the Qumulo cluster.

The Python package `Tk` is required, check if it is available by running this on a terminal:

`python -m tkinter`

Install Tk if needed:

Linux:

- `sudo apt-get install python3-tk`  (Ubuntu, Debian)
- `sudo yum install -y tkinter tk-devel`  (RHEL, CentOS, Oracle)
- `sudo dnf install python3-tkinter` (Fedora)
- `sudo pacman -S tk`  (Arch)

Mac:

- `brew install python-tk`

**Mac OS 14 Sonoma notice:** There is an issue with Tk and this Mac OS version that causes the GUI to be a blank white window with no buttons, you'll
need to upgrade Python to `3.13.0a2`, `3.12.1`, or `3.11.7`  (Tested working on `3.12-dev` November 29, 2023)

[More info at Python's Github](https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/110950)

Windows:

- The python insallation from the [Microsoft App Store](https://apps.microsoft.com/detail/9PJPW5LDXLZ5?hl=en-US&gl=US) contains the needed Tk dependencies


User Rights Needed:

This script requires a valid session token for a user with the following RBAC privileges:

`['PRIVILEGE_FS_LOCK_READ', 'PRIVILEGE_SMB_FILE_HANDLE_READ', 'PRIVILEGE_SMB_FILE_HANDLE_WRITE']`


## Installation:

Install the `requirements.txt` file (Linux, Mac and Windows):

  `pip install -r requirements.txt`

Copy `qumulo_lock_manager.py` and `qumulo_lock_manager.conf` to your machine, make the `.py` executable with `chmod +x qumulo_lock_manager.py`

Keep both files in the same place!

Version 1.1.0 adds the ability to specify multiple clusters and a drop down menu to select them.

Edit `qumulo_lock_manager.conf` and enter your cluster addresses and valid Access Tokens on these variables:

- `address = your.cluster.here.com`  (FQDN or IP address)

- `token = session-v1:etc..etc..etc`

## Helpful Qumulo Care Articles:

[How to get an Access Token](https://care.qumulo.com/hc/en-us/articles/360004600994-Authenticating-with-Qumulo-s-REST-API#acquiring-a-bearer-token-by-using-the-web-ui-0-3) 

[Qumulo Role Based Access Control](https://care.qumulo.com/hc/en-us/articles/360036591633-Role-Based-Access-Control-RBAC-with-Qumulo-Core#managing-roles-by-using-the-web-ui-0-7)


## Operation:

Run the script with `/path/to/script/qumulo_lock_manager.py`

**_Please Note!_** File paths are resolved from the root of the Qumulo file system and might be different from what the end user sees!

**_Always_** double check paths before closing any open file handles!!

- Refresh the locks by clicking on the `List Locks` button
- Search for paths by typing in a part of the desired path or IP address of a Lock Holer (Client Machine) and clicking on the `Find Path or IP` button
  * The Locks view will automatically refresh   
- Clear the search box and click on `Search by Path` to see all locks
- To close a file handle, select the desired File ID / Path in the UI and click on the `Close File` button
- To quit, simply close the window  

![Screenshot of UI](https://github.com/Joe-Costa/Qumulo-Lock-Manager/assets/76791218/2fa5cf42-2351-4227-afe2-e08d06d04188)
